it's Christmas Eve 1968 the Apollo 8
spacecraft has successfully completed
its first three orbits around the moon
launched from Cape Canaveral three days
before this is the first time that
humans have ever traveled beyond
low-earth orbit on the vessels fourth
pass the earth slowly comes into view
and reveals itself above the moon's
horizon astronaut Bill Anders
frantically asked his crewmates where
their camera is grabs the Hasselblad
points it towards the window presses the
shutter and takes one of the most
important photographs of all time
Earthrise when the crew was safely home
a few days later they were asked about
the mission Anders famously replied we
went to the moon but we actually
discovered earth what did he and his
fellow crewmates feel in this incredible
moment in a study released just this
past year a team of researchers at the
University of Pennsylvania examined the
testimonies of hundreds of astronauts
who had the opportunity to view the
Earth from space their analysis
uncovered three common feelings first a
greater appreciation for Earth's beauty
second an increased sense of connection
to all other living beings and third an
unexpected often overwhelming sense of
emotion the researchers believe that
seeing the Earth from a great distance
provokes someone to develop new
cognitive frameworks to understand what
they are seeing they believe these
astronauts were forever changed by this
new view this new perspective this new
visual truth this feeling is commonly
referred to as the overview effect only
558 people have ever been to outer space
five hundred and fifty-eight people had
the opportunity to gaze down in awe to
wonder at our planet floating in an
infinite sea of darkness but what if
that number were bigger three years ago
I set off on my own mission to see if I
could bring this feeling of overwhelming
scale and beauty to many more people
just by using one small computer in my
small New York City apartment it was
then in 2013 that I launched daily
overview every day I have used satellite
imagery to create one expansive overhead
view of our planet more than 1,000 of
these images have been created thus far
and more than 600,000 people tune in for
this daily dose of perspectives I create
the imagery by curating photos from the
massive archive of a satellite company
called digital globe they operate a
constellation of five satellites each
roughly the size of an ambulance that is
constantly taking pictures of the earth
as they orbit at 28,000 kilometres per
hour now what does this mean each of
these satellites is equipped with a
camera that has a focal length of 16
meters so that's roughly 290 times
greater than a DSLR camera equipped with
a standard 55 millimeter lens so if we
were able to attach one of their
satellites to the roof of this theater
in Oxford we could take a picture of a
football clearly on the pitch at the
stadium in Amsterdam that's 450
kilometers away that's incredibly
powerful technology and I decided at the
beginning of this project that I would
use that incredible technology to focus
on the places where humans have impacted
the planet as a species we dig and
scrape the earth for resources we
produce energy we raise animals and
cultivate crops for food we build cities
we move around
we create waste in the process of doing
all of these things we shape landscapes
and seascapes and cityscapes with
increasing control and impunity so with
that in mind I'd like to share a few of
my overviews with you now here we see
cargo ships and oil tankers waiting
outside the entry to the port of
Singapore this facility is the second
busiest in the world by terms of total
tonnage accounting for one-fifth of the
world shipping containers and one half
of the annual supply of crude oil if you
look closely at this overview you'll see
a lot of little specks those are
actually cows at a feedlot in
Summerfield Texas in the United States
so once cows reach a particular weight
roughly 300 kilograms they are moved
here and placed on a specialized diet
over the next three to four months the
cows gain an additional a hundred and
eighty kilograms before they are shipped
off to slaughter you're also probably
wondering about this glowing pool at the
top there that gets its color from a
unique combination of manure chemicals
and a particular type of algae that
grows in the stagnant water this is the
mount whale back iron ore mine in the
Pilbara region of Western Australia a
beautiful yet scary scar on the face of
the earth of the world's mined iron ore
ninety-eight percent is used to make
steel and is therefore a major component
in the construction of buildings
automobiles or appliances such as your
dishwasher or refrigerator this is a
solar concentrator in Seville Spain so
this facility contains two thousand six
hundred and fifty mirrors which are
arrayed in concentric circles around 140
meter tall tower at its centre at the
top of the tower there is a capsule of
molten salt that gets heated by the
beams of light reflected upwards from
the mirrors below from there the salt
circulates to a storage tank underground
where it produces steam which spins
turbines and generates enough
electricity to power 70,000
and offsets 30,000 tons of carbon
dioxide emissions every year this
overview shows deforestation in Santa
Cruz Bolivia immediately adjacent to
untouched tracts of rainforest
deforestation the country has primarily
been driven by the expansion of
mechanized agriculture and cattle
ranching so as the country tries to meet
the demand of its growing population and
feed them the sacrificial destruction of
its rainforest has taken place to do so
it is estimated that the country lost
4.5 million acres of rainforest in one
decade alone from 2000 until 2010 this
is the I Shambhala district in Barcelona
Spain so the overview perspective can be
incredibly helpful to help us understand
how cities function and how we can
devise smarter solutions for urban
planning and this will become only more
relevant as it is expected that four
point nine billion people will live in
cities around the world by the year 2030
this area of Barcelona is characterized
by its strict grid pattern apartment
with communal courtyards and these
octagonal intersections which allow for
more sunlight better ventilation and
additional parking at street level and
here we see that grid pattern but under
much different circumstances this is the
Dadaab refugee camp in northern Kenya
the largest such facility of its kind in
the world to cope with the influx of
refugees who are fleeing Somalia where
there is famine and conflict the UN has
built this area gridded out at left
called the LFO extension to house more
and more refugees who are arriving and
occupying these white dots which are
actually tents which will slowly fill up
the area over time so if you have one of
these overviews you have a moment in
time if we have two overviews however
we're able to tell stories about changes
in time I call that feature of the
project juxtaposed and we'll share a few
examples of it with you now so the tool
of fields in Netherlands bloom every
year in April so we take an image
captured in March a few weeks before and
contrast it to one taken a few weeks
later
we're able to watch the flowers bloom in
this magnificent cascade of color it is
estimated that the Dutch produce 4.3
billion tulip bulbs every year in 2015
two dams collapsed and an iron ore mine
in southeastern Brazil causing one of
the worst environmental disasters in the
history of the country it is estimated
that 62 million cubic meters of wastes
were released when the dams broke
destroying numerous villages in the
process including bento Rodrigues seen
here before and after the flood
ultimately nineteen people were killed
in this disaster half a million people
did not have access to clean drinking
water for an extended period of time and
the waste soon entered into the Rio Doce
River extended for 650 kilometres all
the way into the sea killing unknowable
amounts of plant and animal life along
the way and lastly here's a story
related to the crisis in Syria a
conflict which has claimed the lives of
hundreds of thousands of people and
displaced millions
so this patch of desert is seen in m'f
Rock Jordan in 2011 the year the
conflict started and when we compare it
to an image captured just this year in
2017 we see the construction of the
Zaatari refugee camp so just as the
astronauts of Apollo 8 watched the earth
rising above the lunar landscape for the
first time there is no way that you
could have imagined what the places I
just showed you look like from outer
space and while you may enjoy the
aesthetics of an image once you learn
exactly what it is you're seeing you may
struggle with the fact that you still
like it and that's the tension I want to
create with my work because I believe it
is that contemplation that internal
dialogue that will lead to greater
interest in our planet and more
awareness of what we're doing to it I
believe that viewing the Earth from the
overview perspective is more important
now than ever before through the
incredible technology of these
high-flying cameras we can see
and expose the unprecedented impact that
we are having and whether we are
scientists or engineers or policymakers
or investors or artists if we can adopt
a more expansive perspective embrace the
truth of what is going on and
contemplate the long-term health of our
planet we will create a better and safer
and smarter future for our one and only
home
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]